The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Devil's Dooryard, by Wilbur
Coleman Tuttle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Devil's Dooryard

Author: Wilbur Coleman Tuttle

Release Date: July 4, 2021 [eBook #65759]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank and Sue Clark. (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Pulp Magazine
             Project)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL'S DOORYARD ***



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Devil’s Dooryard, by W. C. Tuttle




THE DEVIL’S DOORYARD

A Complete Novelette

by W. C. Tuttle

Author of “Figures of Speech,” “No Wonder,” etc.


“I has to disagree with yuh, cowboy. There is some romance left. A
little barb-wire and a few sheep don’t cut the romance out of the
cow-land. She’s there, Sleepy.”

“Where?” I asks politely. “Me and you ain’t found none of it, Hashknife.
Since we shook loose from Willer Crick we ain’t done nothin’ more
romantic than gettin’ bucked off or lettin’ a gun go off accidental.
There ain’t a man left in the cow-country that would get ambition if
somebody called him a liar, and the villains has gone plumb out of the
female-stealin’ business.”

“Well, get off your bronc, Sleepy. Folks’ll think you’re a statoo on a
horse. I’m too hungry to argue. Git off and look for romance, cowboy.”

“In this town? Shucks. False fronts, licensed gamblin’-house,
livery-stable, general merchandise store and a barber-shop.
Romance ----!”

“We-e-e-ll, get off. Some ham and eggs looks plenty romantic to me.”

I gets off my bronc, limbers up my legs and looks around. The sign on
the store proclaims it to be the Sundown Mercantile Company.

“Sundown City,” says Hashknife. “She’s a cow-town, pure and simple.”

“Pure and simple ----!” says I.

“Why argue?” he says, sarcastic-like. “All day long you finds fault.
You’d kick if yuh was goin’ to get hung, Sleepy Stevens. Ain’t nothin’
right in your eyes?”

“Pure and simple ----”

I reckon the argument had gone far enough, but that wasn’t no way to
bust it up. A bullet splinters the top of the tie-rack, another one
busts the glass in the store-window and another one scorches a lousy dog
which was asleep in the shade of the saloon porch, and it went
_ki-yi-ing_ off down the street. Three punchers comes gallivantin’ out
of the saloon-door, sifting lead back inside, while several more oozes
out the back door, hunting for a place to get behind. I never seen so
much lead wasted and nobody saturated. Somebody heezes more bullets in
our direction, and I stands there with my mouth wide open until
Hashknife kicks my feet from under me, drops a rifle in my lap and then
does a dive across the sidewalk.

“Yuh might do a little somethin’ for yourself,” says he, as I sits there
digging dirt out of my eyes from the last bullet. Then he yells:

“Sleepy, you ---- fool, get under cover! Ain’tcha got no sense?”

I crawls under the sidewalk and sprawls beside him.

“Yuh ain’t got the sense that ---- gave geese in Ireland,” says he.
“Watcha settin’ over there for? You ain’t got no brains a-tall.”

“I never got hit,” says I.

“You never got-- Saya-a-y! Oh, you didn’t get hit, eh? Well, that’s too
bad!”

“Well, what they shootin’ at me for?”

“We might ask ’em--some time. Dang yuh!”

That last wasn’t for me. A puncher raised up out of a wagon-box across
the street and his bullet plowed a furrow in the sidewalk between me and
Hashknife. Hashknife’s .45-70 spoke its little piece, and soon we seen
that feller hop a circle plumb around the corner. Somebody else took a
shot at him on the wing, but I reckon that he was so bow-legged that he
didn’t get hit.

Another Johnny Wise got up on the roof of that gambling-house and begins
to spin lead promiscuous-like, sort of protecting himself with the top
of the false front, but he didn’t reckon on anybody using a rifle on his
fort. He wasn’t shooting at us, but we didn’t mind that. Hashknife lines
up on that false front and his first bullet kicked a hole in them old
boards that you could shove your hand through.

Mister Johnny Wise just upended over the ridge of the building and took
the high dive over the other side. Somebody creased the peak of the roof
just a second after his panties got away from there.

“You keep on and you’ll hurt somebody,” says I. “’Pears to me that
you’re horning into this shindig without knowing the facts of the case.
You may be shooting at our side.”

“In a case like that, I ain’t got no side, Sleepy. I has been shot at
and the same makes me angry.”

“Sa-a-ay,” says a voice kinda behind us, and we turns our heads to see a
little bow-legged puncher hugging the side of the building.

“My ----!” gasps Hashknife. “Hello, Windy.”

The bow-legged _hombre_ stares at us and then begins to laugh.

“Hashknife Hartley, yuh old son-of-a-gun! Where about in ---- did yuh
come from?”

“Git down!” yells Hashknife, as the feller starts to come over to us.

“Thank yuh,” says he. “I plumb forgot them or’nery Bar 20 cow-burglars.”

He gets down on his belly and comes angling over to us, and him and
Hashknife shakes hands laying down.

“Sleepy, meet Windy Woods. Windy used to be with the Hashknife.”

“Yore bunkie?” asks Windy, pointing at me.

“Yeah. Some human drawback, Windy. I has to tell him when to chaw and
kick him when it’s time to spit. I shore has a lot of chores with that
pelican.”

“Haw! Haw! Haw! Howdja ever get so far north, Hashknife?”

“Follerin’ Sleepy. Part Eskimo. Kinda hankers for home scenes. What’s
gone wrong in the saloon?”

“Oh, yeah.”

Windy peers over the edge of the sidewalk and gets dusted with a bullet.
Then he ducks down low and reaches for his cigaret-papers.

“Had a killin’ over there a while ago. My boss, old Mike Haley, mingles
lead with Blazer Thorn, who own that ---- Bar 20, and they both cashes
in.

“Then some of the Bar 20 slaves gits into their heads that they must do
something naughty with their six-guns, and I-- I dunno whether anybody
else hooked a harp or not. Most of the Bar 20 are inside the saloon,
except one which is on the roof of the gamblin’-house.”

“He ain’t up there now,” says Hashknife; “chased him over the edge. One
of ’em got in a wagon-box over there, but I made the old box leak and he
sloped.”

“Yeah, I know,” says Windy, sad-like. “That was me.”

“I begs yore pardon,” says Hashknife. “Why didn’t yuh holler?”

“Holler ----! I didn’t have none comin’. I thought you was some more of
them Bar 20’s, so I circled to get yuh from behind, but I got a look at
yuh and then I knowed you was just company comin’ to our party.”

“How many in your outfit, Windy?”

“Me.”

“Oh!” grunts Hashknife. “They was all shoo tin’ at you?”

“All except ‘Snag’ Thorn--thankin’ him very kindly.”

“Good shot?”

“Ve-e-e-ry good. Yuh see, it was his pa that got a one-way ticket
to ----, and sonny feels bad. Danged bunch of cow-thieves! I reckon they
aimed to wipe out the Circle Dot, but li’l bow-legs was too fast. I’m
foreman of the Circle Dot, Hashknife.

“Yep. Foreman, cow-hands, cook, and chambermaid. Me and old Mike run the
place fine, in spite of him crabbin’ all the time. Poor old devil.
Tough? _Mm-m-m!_ Blazer Thorn heezed five .45’s into him but he hung on
to the bar and emptied his gun into Blazer. Betcha that saloon looks
be-yutiful inside.”

“What was you doin’?” asks Hashknife.

“Me? Aw, I couldn’t help Mike none and then my thoughts turned to the
old man Woods’ li’l bow-legged offspring, and I picked up one of the Bar
20 punchers in my arms and packed him plumb to the door, while I backs
out.

“Then I kicks him in the seat of the pants, rakes the saloon with me
gun, and humped into that wagon-box. Nobody knowed where I went until
you sent me a message to get out of there, and then them Bar 20’s are so
flustered that they missed me somethin’ rediculous.”

“Better keep your head down,” advises Hashknife, when Windy peeks over
the edge.

“Looky!” grunts Windy. “Sons of guns want peace.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

There’s a white handkerchief waving out of the saloon-door and then a
man comes out, looks around and motions for the rest to come out, which
they does, packing a man with them.

They crosses the street to a wagon, wherein they places their man, and
then they drives away, two men in the wagon and three more on horses.
Then another man rides out from behind the saloon, sees us and comes
over with both hands in sight. He’s the dark, hatchet-faced person, sort
of serious-looking, and sets his bronc like a regular puncher. We’re on
the sidewalk now and he pulls up near us and says:

“Woods, I’m kinda sorry this happened. I ain’t extendin’ no sympthy to
the Circle Dot, yuh understand, but I don’t like this six-to-one
fightin’.”

“I didn’t get hurt, none to speak about,” says Windy, “and I didn’t hang
out no white flag. If yuh asks me, Snag, I’d say that yo’re payin’ money
to a lot of danged poor shots.”

He turns slow-like, and looks down the road. Then he turns back to us.

“You ought to be glad,” says he.

“Yeah?”

“What’s goin’ be done with the Circle Dot?” he asks.

“The same of which is none of your ---- business, Thorn. I reckon the
three of us can wiggle along--as long as we’ve got any cows left to
foller around.”

He just sets there and looks at us, and I can see that he’s got the face
of a killer, but he don’t make no break for his gun. He looks real hard
at Hashknife, sort of sizing him up, and then he turns his horse and
rides away.

“Bad _hombre_?” I asks.

“Well,” says Windy, “he’s called ‘Snag.’ They don’t make ’em faster with
a gun, but he’s got pe-culiar ideas. I don’t reckon Snag would shoot a
man in the back nor quarrel with a drunk man and I ain’t never heard of
him swearin’ at anybody, but he’s a chip off the old block, and Blazer
Thorn was plumb pizen in a fight.”

“What did yuh mean by ‘three of us?’” I asks.

“You two and me. I’m givin’ yuh each a job.”

“Well,” says Hashknife after a while, “a feller’s got to get a job once
in a while, I reckon, ain’t he, Sleepy? Sleepy’s looking for romance,
Windy. Know what romance is?”

“Yes,” says Windy, “I don’t, but if it is somethin’ yuh can find in the
or’neriest danged cow-country on earth you’ll find her here on the
Sundown range, y’betcha. There’s everythin’ here except peaceable
people. Let’s get poor old Mike and make some funeral arrangements.”

We buries old Mike the next day at Sundown City and there wasn’t much of
a audience. The preacher hurried so he’d have time to say a few words
over the remains of Blazer Thorn, and then we went to the Circle Dot.

“Hackamore” Allen, the sheriff, comes out to the ranch and kinda sets
around a while. He’s a gloomy-looking jasper with a tired eye, and he
radiates cheer like a undertaker.

“Whatcha goin’ to do with the ranch, Windy?” he asks.

“Run it.”

“You don’t own it.”

“What the ---- has that got to do with it, Hack? She don’t owe nobody a
cent, and there’s over a thousand head of good cows--or was, until the
last time the Bar 20 branded.”

“Yeah? Well, I reckon I’ll be driftin’ on.”

He nods to me and Hashknife, and then rides back down the road.

“Windy,” says Hashknife. “Would yuh mind gossipin’ a little? Me and
Sleepy don’t _sabe_ the state of affairs around here.”

“Just ordinary,” says Windy. “She begins quite a long time ago, gents.
This here range used to be milk, honey and brotherly love, you know it?
Sure she did. Blazer Thorn and Mike Haley was thicker than thieves until
one day Mike stops for supper at the Bar 20. I reckon that Mike had a
scoop or two under his belt and he feels comical. He says to Blazer,
‘Know why I eats here so often?’ Blazer says, ‘Why?’

“Old Mike says, ‘I like the taste of my own beef.’

“Well, Blazer must ’a’ been dyspeptic or somethin’ that day, ’cause he
kicks back his chair and calls Mike a ---- liar. Mike’s plumb
hard-boiled and he don’t think that any man knows enough about him to
call him a name like that, but some punchers grabbed the two of ’em and
stopped a piece of gun-play. Blazer orders Mike off the ranch. Mike was
joshin’ at first, but he’s been losin’ a lot of stock, and he gets to
thinkin’--him bein’ sore anyway, and well--yuh know them things grows.
Blazer’s plumb wild. Swears that the Circle Dot is stealin’ his cows,
the same of which changes this country a heap, scaring out the bees and
smearin’ the honey in the mud.

“Both outfits draws a dead-line. Ours is that old cross-roads, and the
Bar 20 declares Cow Crick to be the stoppin’-place of the Circle Dot
outfit. Then Blazer and Mike makes a agreement. Both of them pelicans
are deadly with a gun. Blazer has a wife and this boy. Yeah, this
started when Snag was mostly a ganglin’ kid, practisin’ with a .22.

“Both of them _hombres_ knows it’s suicide to meet. Mike ain’t wistful
to make Mrs. Thorn a widder with a orphing kid, so he agrees. Mike is to
use Saturday as his day in town, and Blazer is to appear in person on
Wednesdays.

“Fine. Folks got so used to it that they takes it for granted. Well,
Mrs. Thorn goes the way of all critters, and Snag grows up, but the feud
goes on just the same--only worse. It got so that the punchers of both
outfits acts mean towards each other. There is a few killin’s.

“I reckon that Mike forgot. He sold a bunch of cows to a buyer from
Chicago, and the man is in a hurry to get away; so Mike meets him in
Sundown City--on Wednesday. You _sabe_ the rest, I reckon. Mike and
Blazer comes face to face in the saloon. Blooey! They ain’t met before
for ten years, but they didn’t need no introduction. I reckon that’s
all. My gosh, I ain’t talked that much for three years.”

“Is there anything in this rustlin’ stuff?” asks Hashknife.

“Everythin’,” nods Windy. “Everybody suspects everybody else, but she’s
a cinch that the Bar 20 brands more than their share. Funny thing,
though, Hashknife, nobody knows where the stock goes. Just two ways out.
Yuh can take a herd to the railroad at Hollister or yuh can take ’em
back through Hangman’s Pass and over to Blue Nose. There ain’t no other
way out of this basin, but no cows have been taken either way.”

“Can’t yuh take ’em over the divide?” I asks.

“Naw. Not unless the cows has wings.”

“That’s it,” grins Hashknife. “You been lookin’ at the ground when yuh
should ’a’ been lookin’ in the air, Windy. They flew.”

“Mebby. Honest to gosh, I’m willin’ to believe it, Hashknife.”

“Who’s this comin’?” I asks.

“That’s Bowers. He owns the Bar B outfit, which is between us and the
Bar 20. He’s likely comin’ up here to beef about somebody stealin’ his
danged cows.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Windy was right. This Bowers is a melancholy-looking jasper with sorrel
hair, and he talks like he had a mouthful of mush.

“Yeah, I’m losin’ cows all the danged time,” he wails, humping over his
saddle-horn. “Wisht I knowed what to do.”

“I’ll tell yuh what yuh ought to do,” suggests Hashknife.

“What?”

“Get your adenoids cut out.”

“My addy-noids?”

“Uh-huh. Your talk sounds like a bogged-down calf. You know what I
mean--kinda _glub-glub_.”

“Well,” says he foolish-like: “Well, I’ll be ----!”

Then he looks over at Windy, who looks as serious as a funeral.

“You _sabe_ what he means?”

“Sure. He’s right, too.”

“Well. Mebbe that’s right. Huh!”

Then Mr. Bowers swings his horse around and goes _poco poco_ off down
the road, deep in thought.

“What’s adenoids, Hashknife?” asks Windy. “I know danged well that
Bowers ought to have his cut out, yuh understand, but I ain’t clear in
my own mind what they be.”

“Somethin’ that grows in his head,” says Hashknife.

“Sure,” nods Windy. “I hope they has to remove his whole danged head to
get at ’em.”

“What did the sheriff mean, Windy, when he wanted to know what was going
to be done with the Circle Dot? Didn’t Haley have no relatives?”

“I dunno--dang it all, Sleepy. Never said nothin’ to nobody about any.
Never left no will nor nothin’. Reckon he feels that he’s so danged
tough that he’ll outlive anybody else anyway, so why make a will? I’ve
got somethin’--wait.”

Windy goes into the house and brings out a couple of sheets of paper.

“This is all I can find,” says he. “Looks like Mike started to write a
letter and then tore it up, ’cause this is just part of it.”

The top part of the letter had been torn off, but what we’ve got reads
like this:

  --family, and I reckon you’ll have it all when I pass out. Feller back
  East tells me where he thinks you are, so I’m taking a chance. I would
  rather like to see you, but this ain’t no--

And the rest is torn off.

“Here is the envylope,” says Windy. “Same as the old man’s, only his
middle letter was H, and this’n is J. What is a em-po-ree-um?”

“I dunno,” says Hashknife, looking at the envelope. “Must be somethin’.”

“My ----, you’ve got a fine head on yuh,” says Windy. “You’re goin’ to
do well.”

“I sure has,” grins Hashknife, “and I’ll prove it to yuh, Windy. I’ve
got a friend in Frisco--a lawyer, and he’ll find out for us.”

“Lawyers costs money, Hashknife.”

“This one won’t. I packed this whippoorwill out of a tight corner on the
Barbary Coast one night and I’m bettin’ he ain’t forgot it. He comes
danged near bein’ a sailor, y’betcha. Crimps, they calls ’em, and I sure
put a crimp into about six of ’em.

“He wasn’t very heavy and I just had enough hooch under my belt to shoot
straight, but at that I had to hit two with my gun-barrel. If M. J.
Haley is at the em-po-ree-um, I’m bettin’ that Billy Winters will find
him. Sounds like a gamblin’-house to me.”

“All right, cowboy,” grins Windy. “You do the writin’, will yuh? I ain’t
noways pencil-wise--me.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Hashknife writes the letter, explaining the best he can, and we posts it
the next day in Sundown City. We don’t meet none of the Bar 20 bunch,
but we does run into the sheriff and he seems glad to see us.

“Nice weather,” says Hashknife, and then adds, “I like it hot.”

“Yeah?” says the sheriff, and then he says to Windy--

“Baldy Willis got shot yesterday.”

“Did he?” says Windy. “Accidental, I suppose. Gol dang it, sheriff, they
ought to have a school where a feller like him can learn to handle a gun
and--”

“He didn’t get shot accidental,” says the sheriff, deliberate-like.

“Oh!” grunts Windy. “’Sassed somebody, eh?”

“Nope. He was crossin’ around at the lower end of Devil’s Dooryard and
got a rifle-bullet plumb through his shoulder.”

Windy squints at the sheriff and then at us. Then he rubs his nose,
kinda thoughtful-like, and says--

“Well, I reckon you can talk a little more, sheriff.”

“Baldy says that he was knocked plumb hazy, but he seems to remember
hearin’ a voice say, ‘Maybe you’ll keep off the Circle Dot Range after
this.’”

“That’s a lie!” snaps Windy, dropping his hand to his gun.

“Now, now, don’t get in a hurry,” says the sheriff. “I’m just saying
what Baldy said. Yuh can’t blame me for what somebody else said, can
yuh?”

“Yuh hadn’t ought to repeat scandal,” says Hashknife. “Now, we’ll tell
it to somebody, kinda exaggeratin’ it a little, and they’ll tell it to
somebody else, kinda exaggeratin’ it a little, and by and by she gets to
be a regular whale of a statement.”

“I’m just tellin’ what Baldy said,” insists the sheriff. “He says he
thinks he heard that, and--”

“If yuh go out to the Bar 20 soon, yuh can tell Baldy that I think he’s
a ---- liar,” says Windy.

“Bar 20?” says Hashknife, like he’d never heard of it before. “Oh yeah.
Ain’t that the place where all their cows has twin calves, Windy?”

“Uh-huh. Funny, ain’t it. The Circle Dot cows are like Mary’s little
lamb. They never bring nothin’ but their tails behind them.”

“I don’t know who shot Baldy,” says the sheriff, “but I do know that I’m
plumb sick and tired of the way things is goin’. The Bar 20 is losin’
cows every day and Bowers is wailin’ all the time about his cows being
missin’. I tell yuh, it’s got to stop.”

“You ---- tootin’ she has!” snaps Windy. “The Circle Dot ain’t bothered
yuh none about missin’ cows, but if anybody asks yuh--we’re loser,
y’betcha. I reckon you’ve got plenty to do, dry-nursin’ Snag Thorn and
‘Blubber’ Bowers, so I won’t take up none of yore time. _Sabe?_”

“Bowers said--” begins the sheriff, but Windy stops him.

“Bowers be ----!”

“He’s got complaints.”

“Adenoids,” says Hashknife. “Aggravated case. Yuh ought to send him to a
doctor.”

“Addy--what?” asks the sheriff.

“Noids. Shouldn’t be surprised if they’re doin’ the work that his brain
ought to do. You’ve got a touch of ’em, too. How’s your tonsils?”

“My which?”

“Let’s play a game of pool, Windy,” suggests Hashknife. “It’s too hot to
stand here in the sun. See yuh later, sheriff.”

“Baldy might not live,” says the sheriff, offhanded-like.

“Well,” says Windy, “ther’s enough of ’em at the Bar 20 to bury him
decently, but tell ’em not to fire no salutes over his grave, ’cause
they might accident’ly hurt each other. _Adios._”

We left the sheriff standing there, chawing at the corner of his
mustache, and we went into the saloon and started a game. The bartender
looks us over, sort of suspicious-like, but can’t refuse to let us play.

“All I asks of you fellers is this. If any of the Bar 20 shows up,
fer ----’s sake don’t shoot toward my back-bar,” says he. “That last
ruckus ruined all my whisky-glasses and everybody has had to drink out
of beer-glasses, and they ain’t got no sense of proportion. _Sabe?_”

Bowers comes in after while and stands around watching the game. After
while he says to Windy, confidential-like--

“I been up to the Bar 20.”

“Well, well,” grunts Windy, amazed-like. “You’re gettin’ to be a regular
traveler. When did yuh get back and how are the folks?”

“Baldy ain’t expected to live.”

“Who don’t expect him to live--Baldy?”

“Nope. He’s danged awful low and might pass out any time.”

“He ain’t got nothin’ on the rest of ’em,” states Windy, “and they can
all pass out, for all of me.”

“Snag says somebody has got to pay for shootin’ Baldy.”

“Well, if he has to pay what Baldy’s worth, I reckon it won’t break
nobody.”

“Somebody took seven white-faced cows of mine out of my Salt Spring
Corral, and I can’t find ’em,” says Bowers, complainin’-like.

“Yuh sure got troubles, ain’t yuh, feller?” laughs Hashknife, squinting
down his cue. “Yuh ought to have patience, don’t yuh know it?

“Ever hear of Job? No? He had boils. Fact. Millions of ’em, but he stuck
it out and didn’t whimper.

“You’ve got a cinch alongside of poor old Job. You ain’t got nothin’ but
loss of beef, other folks’ troubles and adenoids. Get cheerful, why
don’t yuh?”

“Well, dawggone it, I lost seventeen head of cows last--”

“I tell yuh what to do,” says Hashknife, serious-like. “You make out a
list describin’ your lost cows, givin’ the name, age and general
disposition and mail it to us, will yuh? Fine!”

“What good will that do yuh?”

“No good on earth; but yuh hankers to tell about ’em so bad that I just
thought it might relieve yuh to set down and write it out--and I don’t
like to listen to your voice. Honest to grandma, I don’t, Bowers. I
ain’t jokin’.”

Bowers goes out, talking to himself, and Windy sets down in a chair.

“Mamma mine!” he chuckles. “Hashknife, you sure knows how to talk to
folks. I wish I had eddication like that. All I can do is say something
that is either plumb full of sugar, or else it’s fightin’ talk.

“You can say awful things to people and send ’em away talking to
themselves, and they don’t know whether to get sore or shake hands with
yuh. I’ll say you’re a wonder.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

For a couple of days we had perfect peace at the ranch. We don’t do a
danged thing--much, except set around and wait for trouble. Windy
insists that the Bar 20 is going to make trouble for us; so we polishes
up all the guns and waits for the explosion.

Bowers pesticates up our way and sets down with us. I reckon he’s lost
so much stock that it’s on his mind all the time.

“I’ll be busted in a little while,” he wails. “I just sets there and
watches my money disappear. Was over to the Bar 20 yeste’-day. Doctor
don’t know yet if Baldy will pull through or not. I asked Snag if he had
any suspicions who shot Baldy, and he said he sure did. I asked him
who.”

“He told yuh it was none of your business,” says Hashknife.

Bowers looks at Hashknife queer-like and then says--

“How did yuh know that?”

“Deducted it, Blubber. I could tell that by lookin’ at yuh. Tomorrow I’m
goin’ over and talk with Snag Thorn.”

“You are not!” declares Windy.

“Uh-huh, I sure am. Now, I know what I want to do, Windy.”

“You’ll get killed sure as thunder.”

“Thanks, Windy.”

“I wouldn’t advise it,” says Bowers. “I sure wouldn’t.”

“Which entirely makes up my mind,” grins Hashknife. “Why don’t you rise
to object, Sleepy?”

“Go ahead,” says I. “Ventilation won’t hurt yuh none, I reckon.”

Hashknife went. About noon the next day he saddles his bronc, refuses to
let us go with him, and rides away.

“You ain’t got a lick of sense, Hashknife!” yells Windy.

“I know it,” says Hashknife. “This is a job that takes brains, so I’m
leavin’ the brains behind me to keep safe.”

“Now, what did he mean, Sleepy?” asks Windy.

“I dunno. The longer I lives with that blamed hatchet-faced cross
between a danged fool and a heavenly angel, the less I _sabe_ his
_wau-wau_. Mebbe he wants to commit suicide, but I’m bettin’ money that
he ain’t.”

It was about two hours before we seen him come into sight. He pokes into
the ranch, takes his saddle off and comes up to the porch, dragging the
saddle with him.

“Well, yuh got back, I see,” grins Windy.

“Yuh got good eyesight, Windy. Awful hot today. Got a blister on my
heel, too.”

“Well, did yuh bring any messages from the Bar 20, Hashknife?” I asks.

“Uh-huh--two. Long distance, as yuh might say.”

“Meanin’ what?” inquires Windy. Hashknife pulls his saddle over to him
and yanks it around. Then he points to a long jagged rip in the fork,
where a bullet plowed its way. Then he points to a jagged hole, drilled
plumb through the right side of the cantle.

“Read ’em for youselves,” says he, grinning. “The first one busted into
the fork and the next one just grazed my boot as I flipped off the
saddle.”

“Where?” asks Windy.

“Just across the Cow Crick. I reckon it’s Cow Crick. I’m just goin’ up
the far bank, when I gets reminded that I ain’t wanted. I humps out of
the saddle before the next message arrives. I sure comes close to
gettin’ peeled. I lit low down behind the bank and my bronc went across
the crick into some willers. I sure tried to spot that bushwhacker, but
he was too far away. A magpie gave him away by flyin’ over his location
and then doin’ a upward twist, but there wasn’t much between him and me,
and the danged fool shoots too close for comfort. Then I had to chase
that fool bronc for half a mile before I got my hands on him, and I got
a blister on my heel--dang the luck!”

“You ought to cuss your luck,” says Windy. “You’re lucky to be alive.”

“Must be a big blister,” complains Hashknife. “Got my feet wet, too.”

“I hope you’re satisfied,” says I, and Hashknife nods.

“Uh-huh, I’m satisfied of one thing, Sleepy.”

“What’s that?”

“I dunno--yet. I’ve got to do somethin’ for that blister.”

Hashknife limps down to the bunk-house, dragging his saddle.

“What do yuh reckon he found out?” asks Windy. “Why is he satisfied?”

“Don’t ask me, Windy, and it won’t do yuh no good to ask him. A clam is
a howling hyena beside that jasper, when he wants to keep still about
his thoughts.”

Then he wants to see the place they calls the Devil’s Dooryard; so Windy
guides us to that place. It sure looks like it might ’a’ been. Once on a
time it was a volcano which busted out the side of the mountain and it
sure made a barren spot out of a piece of country about two miles wide
and three miles long.

Man, that must ’a’ been a hot place at one time. There ain’t a danged
thing growing there. She’s just a humped-up mass of pillars, boulders
and jagged rocks, kind of red and yaller and melted-like. The floor of
it is solid rock, where the lava spewed over the side of the mountain.
This rock is kinda like glass, having been heated so blamed hot.

We rides up one side of it, almost to the top, but she’s all alike. It
ain’t no place to ride a horse on account of the sharp rocks. At the top
is just one high cliff of the same rocks, sticking two or three hundred
feet high into the air. The whole divide is one series of cliffs. We
rides back to the foot of it and sits down to rest in the shade of a
pillar.

“This place is sure well named,” opines Hashknife. “I reckon it was too
hot for the devil, so he moved to his present location. This is where
that Bar 20 puncher got shot, eh?”

“That’s what they say,” nods Windy. “It’s about five miles to the Bar 20
from here. I reckon he just hung on and let his bronc take him home.”

“Do yuh reckon he lied?” asks Hashknife.

“No, I don’t. Barrin’ the fact that he works for the Bar 20, Baldy ain’t
such a bad _hombre_. I worked with him on the Seven Bar Seven Horse
outfit, and he ain’t the kind that would lie thataway. Likely he just
got it in his mind, don’t yuh know? Kinda knowin’ he was on the Circle
Dot Range, and then gettin’ shot thataway, he might ’a’ imagined
somebody yelled at him.”

“I reckon somebody yelled at him,” says Hashknife.

“Yuh think he--uh--told the truth?” asks Windy.

“I dunno. Mebbe they did and mebbe they didn’t. If they did, the Circle
Dot has got it on the Bar 20, ’cause nobody yelled at me, that’s a
cinch.”

“I reckon they keeps close watch on us,” opines Windy.

                 *       *       *       *       *

We rides back to the ranch and the next morning we went to Sundown City.
As we rides in past the little depot, the agent yells at us and we goes
over. He’s got a telegram for us, which reads:

  WILL ARRIVE WEDNESDAY. HANG ON UNTIL I GET THERE.

  Signed M. J. HALEY.

“Holy henhawks!” explodes Windy. “He’s comin’! Hang on until I get
there! That sounds like old Mike’s voice. Betcha forty dollars he’s a
go-getter.”

“That’s tomorrow,” says Hashknife. “What’s the nearest station down the
line, Windy?”

“Kelly’s Fork. It’s about six miles, but a train don’t stop there unless
she’s flagged.”

“We’ll flag her,” says Hashknife. “We’re going to surprise some of these
wise jaspers. _Sabe?_ If we waits for him to come here, everybody will
see him, don’t yuh see? That’ll make four of us, Windy, and if this here
Haley is hard-boiled we can stand off the Bar 20 or any other
cow-stealin’ outfit.”

“Yeah, that’s a hy-iu scheme, Hashknife. We’ll just do that little
thing. Train is due along there about noon.”

There’s a lot of Bar 20 broncs at the tie-rack, and Hashknife wants to
go over and see what the owners look like, but me and Windy points out
the error of his ways and tells him that we’ve got to be intact to meet
the new owner of the Circle Dot.

“I reckon it’s right,” admits Hashknife, “but I feels that I’m bein’
hoodled out of town. I’d swap lead with all that bunch, Windy--if they
can’t shoot any straighter than they did at you.”

“That _hombre_ that bushwhacked you shot straight enough,” says I.

“Nope. He would have hit me both times.”

“Maybe he didn’t want to hit yuh.”

“Never thought of that, Sleepy. Huh! He’s a wonder at missin’, if he
didn’t.”

The next day we rides to Kelly’s Fork, and takes a saddled horse for our
new boss to ride back. We flagged the train and I’m betting that half of
the passengers thought it was a hold-up. The conductor howls like blazes
when he finds why we stopped him, but Hashknife says:

“Shucks, you ought to be glad we only want a passenger. We’ll go with
yuh.”

The conductor cusses a little more, but swings on to the coach with us
and we all pilgrims down the aisle, the conductor calling:

“M. J. Haley! M. J. Haley! M. J. Haley! Is M. J. Haley on board?”

We went through two cars before we gets a response. A tired-looking girl
takes the conductor by the sleeve and stops him. He says to her:

“Excuse me, ma’am, but I haven’t time to talk to you now. M. J. Haley!
M. J. Haley! Is M. J. Haley on board?”

“I am M. J. Haley,” says the lady. “Is--is somebody looking for me?”

“M. J. Haley?” grunts Windy. “Nun-not M. J. Huh--Haley of the Circle
Dot?”

“Yes,” says she, “from San Francisco.”

“Well, get off!” snaps the conductor. “I can’t hold this train all day.”

I grabs her valise, and we staggers down the aisle and swings to the
ground.

“Must be a mistake,” opines Windy, scratching his head. “We was lookin’
for a man named M. J. Haley.”

“A lawyer, a Mr. Winters, sent me,” says she. “I am Mary Jane Haley.”

“Well, I hope to die,” gasps Windy. “I hope to die.”

“If yuh don’t shut your mouth you’ll get your tonsils sunburnt,” says
Hashknife.

“Well, I’ll be everlastin’ly teetotally jiggered!” grunts Windy.
“Whatcha know about that? Was Mike Haley a kin of yours, miss?”

“He was my father’s brother, I believe,” says she, and I can see her
eyes laughing at Windy’s funny expression.

“Uh,” says Windy, kinda vacant-like. “Yes’m.”

“Will you take me out to the farm?” she asks.

“Farm?” says Windy, and then looks at Hashknife, whose face is serious.
Then Windy looks at her and half-nods his head.

“Yeah--oh sure. Uh-huh, but we don’t call ’em farms, ma’am. We can take
yuh out there--in fact, we came after yuh, but----”

Windy glances at her clothes and then looks at Hashknife, who shakes his
head and says:

“Yuh see ma’am, we looked for a man person, who natcherally don’t wear
skirts, and we ain’t got nothin’ but a saddle-horse and no extra pants
and--Sleepy, fer ----’s sake get in on this explanation, will yuh?
Standin’ there like a grinnin’ hyener.”

“I think I understand,” says she.

“Bless yuh for that, ma’am,” says Hashknife, wiping his brow. “That ----
Sleepy makes me sore sometimes. Oh, he talks a plenty when he ought to
keep still.”

M. J. Haley sees the funny side of things and we all laughs together.

“I’ve got a idea,” says Hashknife. “Mebbe that little store over there
has overalls, Windy.”

“I would wear them,” says Mary Jane, and Hashknife grins like a fool and
says--

“Come on ma’am; if he’s got ’em we’ll get ’em, and if he ain’t got no
back room for yuh to dress in I’ll make him come out in the street.”

He had ’em all right. I dunno how Mary Jane got into ’em, but she did. I
let her ride my bronc, ’cause the one we brings for M. J. Haley wasn’t
no ladies’ saddle-animal. Yuh can mostly always sometimes tell about a
feller, if yuh see him on a high-minded bronc, and we wanted M. J. Haley
to measure right up to us.

Mary Jane never rode a horse before, but she was game. I knowed danged
well that them overalls ached a heap by the time we hit the Circle Dot,
but she don’t chirp a bit over discomfort.

Sing Lee has swamped out Mike’s bood-wah for her and we lets her move
right in. She ain’t been in there long when Bowers comes poking up the
main road. He naturally comes over to see us.

“Blubber has likely lost another cow,” says Windy, but Blubber didn’t
speak of lost cows. He rides up to us and says--

“Did he come?”

“Who?” asks Windy.

“The new feller who is goin’ to boss this outfit.”

“There ain’t no feller goin’ to boss this outfit,” states Windy.

“Zasso? Huh. Station agent says that yuh got a telegraft from M. J.
Haley who says he’s comin’ today. Train comes in, but nobody gets off.
Some of the Bar 20 was down there to see what he looks like.”

“Was they disappointed?” asks Hashknife.

“Natcherally. I comes up to see why he didn’t come. The sheriff was
wonderin’ who he was, and I thought maybe you’d--uh----”

“Did yuh?” says Hashknife. “Your thoughts are like your talk,
Bowers--kinda suckin’ mud. What’s it any of the sheriff’s business?”

“I dunno. Say, Baldy Willis died this mornin’.”

“----!” says Windy, soft-like. “Poor old Baldy.”

“Uh-huh,” admits Bowers. “But it’s just like I said--he didn’t have no
danged business on this range, nohow. When a feller has been warned to
keep off----”

“Let your voice fall, Blubber,” says Windy. “You’ve talked enough.
_Sabe?_ Me nor none of this outfit had anything to do with killin’
Baldy, and the next _hombre_ what insinuates that we did is goin’
kihootin’ to his God or beat me on the draw. That goes for you, the
sheriff or any of that cow-stealin’ Bar 20 outfit. _Sabe?_”

“Honest to ---- I ain’t insinuatin’ nothin’” wails Bowers. “Whatcha
ridin’ me fer? I’ve lost twenty-seven head of cows in the last week, and
I ain’t----”

“Yo’re all packed, wired and billed for shipment--git off this ranch!”
yowls Windy. “I don’t care if somebody steals all your cows! I hope they
do. I hope you’re the last calf they slickears. I hope they slaps every
brand in the State register on your hide and then adds a dewlap and
notches your ears.”

“That ain’t no way to talk,” grumbles Blubber, tearful-like. “I try to
git along and----”

“You better do somethin’ besides try to git along,” says Windy. “You
just ‘get along,’ Bowers, and get along fast.”

Bowers swings his horse around and points toward home.

“What did he want?”

We turns and looks at Mary Jane, standing in the doorway.

“Aw-w, he’s a danged maul-headed prairie-dog, which has to chirp every
time somebody lifts one of his dogies,” says Windy.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Mary Jane laughs and shakes her head.

“I don’t think I understand.”

“He means that this person ain’t such a much,” explains Hashknife, “and
that he gets husky in the neck because somebody rustles his beef.”

“You might try saying it different,” says she, looking at me.

“Well,” says I, “this whippoorwill is about three jumps short of being
half-witted and he----”

“No,” says Mary Jane, “that isn’t exactly clear either.”

“He ain’t got good sense, ma’am,” says Hashknife.

“The ---- I ain’t!” I snaps, ’cause it makes me mad.

“Back up--you’re in your own loop,” grins Hashknife; “I was speakin’
about Bowers, Sleepy,” and then he turns to Mary Jane.

“This person ain’t got good sense, ma’am. He thinks that somebody is
stealin’ his cows and he comes over here to talk about it.”

“Oh, I see; who does he suspect?”

“Us, I reckon,” says Windy. “They think we killed Baldy Willis, too.”

“Yuh better tell her the whole sad tale, Windy,” says Hashknife.
“Remember she ain’t wise to that layout here.”

“That’s right, Hashknife, I forgot I want to give her some of the old
man’s things too.”

“Let’s go inside,” says Mary Jane. “It’s too hot out here.”

“You tell her, Windy,” says Hashknife. “Me and Sleepy will be down at
the bunk-house.”

In about half an hour we hears a pistol-shot and we tumbles out of the
bunk-house, heeled for trouble. There ain’t nobody in sight, but pretty
soon Windy comes down to see us.

“Hear her shoot?” he asks. “Didja?”

“Her shoot?” parrots Hashknife.

“Uh-huh. Mary Jane Haley fired her first shot. Honest to gosh. Missed my
ear by the breadth of a gnat’s whisker.”

“Shootin’ at you?”

“We-e-e-ll, kinda at me, Hashknife. I tells her the story of the Circle
Dot and then I gives her old Mike’s effects, which included his old .45
Colt. She looks at the old gun, and says, ‘Do I have to carry a gun like
that?’

“I says, ‘It’s a danged good gun, if it ain’t too hard to pull.’ I shows
her what I means and she tries it. Dang the luck! I thought Mike emptied
it into Blazer, but I reckon he only shot five times.”

“Scare her?” I asks.

“I dunno. I went under the sofy like a picket-pin when he sees a hawk.
When I peeked out she’s still got the gun in her hand, and is kinda
feelin’ of the spot over her heart. I loaded it for her, but made her
leave it on the table until I got to the door.”

“We’ll teach her how to shoot,” says I.

“No you won’t,” objects Windy, “but we will have to teach her to point
it at enemies instead of friends.”

“Here comes the sheriff,” says Hashknife. “Wonder what he wants?”

The sheriff rides in the gate and heads toward the house, so we moves up
and meets him at the steps.

“Nice large afternoon,” says Hashknife, pleasant-like.

The sheriff gives a short nod and looks at the open door of the house.
Then he turns to Windy, and says----

“I’d like to see M. J. Haley.”

“Yuh would?”

“I said I would.”

“What for?”

Windy says this kinda soft-like and the sheriff squints at him for
several seconds before he says----

“Baldy Willis died.”

“Yeah, we heard about it,” says Hashknife. “What’s M. J. Haley got to do
with Baldy Willis’ demise?”

“Baldy was shot on the Circle Dot Range,” says the sheriff,
meaning-like. “He didn’t have no business on this range, I reckon,
but--I want to see the owner of this outfit. _Sabe?_ He’s responsible,
or I’ll hold him responsible until I can put the deadwood on the guilty
man.”

“Snag Thorn send yuh?” asks Hashknife.

“He did not! He told me to keep out of this, but I’m the sheriff,
and----”

“Bein’ sheriff means quite a lot to you, don’t it?” asks Hashknife.
“You’d just be plumb miserable if yuh wasn’t sheriff, wouldn’t yuh,
Allen?”

“I didn’t come here to listen to you yappin’,” says he. “I want the man
who owns this here ranch. _Sabe?_”

“Were you looking for some one?”

We all turns and looks at the door where Mary Jane is standing. The
sheriff looks at her and then at us.

“There’s the owner of the Circle Dot,” says Hashknife. “Try to arrest
her.”

The sheriff stares at her for a long time and then looks at us.

“Yuh figure she had anythin’ to do with the killin’ of Baldy?” asks
Windy.

The sheriff sort of starts to reach up to his hat but his hand stops and
rubs his chin. Then he turns his horse around and starts for the gate.
He just says one word, and that is kinda like he was speakin’ to
himself----

Mary Jane looks at us and then at Hack Allen, who is poking off down the
road. Hashknife steps up beside her and then grins at us.

“The boss was sure heeled,” says he, and then he took her hand from the
folds of her skirt, and I’m a liar if she didn’t have the .45 Colt. In
the other hand she’s got a small bottle. Hashknife peers at the bottle
and then kinda grins back of his hand.

“I--I--Mr. Woods said it needed oil, so I--” says she.

“Uh-huh,” says Hashknife, serious-like. “But yuh hadn’t ought
to--uh--ma’am. I reckon a gun has feelin’s and mebbe--well, I’ve took
that kinda stuff myself, and I sure mixed her plentiful with lemon
juice, and even at that--uh----”

“I thought that oil was oil,” says she.

“Oh sure,” nods Hashknife. “It sure is, but--uh--that old six-shooter
ain’t sick. _Sabe?_ I’ll get yuh some gun-oil.”

“Would yuh have shot at the sheriff?” asks Windy.

“It--it seems to be the thing around here,” says she, serious-like.
Hashknife stares at her for a moment and then at us.

“Ma’am, I’m plumb glad you wasn’t a he. Some fellers are so danged
timid.”

“I am,” says she. “I have never done anything more serious than to sell
lace in a department store. The lawyer found me there and I had just got
my week’s pay, and also a notice that my services were no longer
required. The lawyer was lovely to me, and--he said that Mr. Hartley was
a close friend of his.”

“Sure was close once,” nods Hashknife. “Old Whiskers with his hay-hook
wasn’t far behind us either. I reckon there’s a heap of difference
between the he-men out here and the ones in town. Cow-punchers are
rough, ma’am, but they don’t mean half what they do or say. I hope
you’ll excuse Windy and Sleepy if they makes bad breaks at times ----
knows I’ve done my dangest for ’em.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

“I knew a cowboy once,” says she. “I know now that he was a cowboy, but
he didn’t say he was. It was in San Francisco a year ago. There were
four of us--another girl, and two young men from the store and myself.
We went slumming down to Chinatown and the Barbary Coast.

“We were up in a Chinese noodle-house when a number of young men came
in; I think they were drunk. One of them tried to kiss me. The young man
who was with me asked him to stop and another of the crowd knocked him
down.

“The Chinese were frightened. Some of the other men grabbed Gladys,
and--oh, it was awful! I saw one of the men hit a Chinaman with a chair
and then one of them grabbed me and tried to pull me across the table,
but just then a man came from somewhere.

“He was wearing a big hat and I remember that he did not have any
necktie or coat on, and he was smiling. He crashed into the crowd and
tore his way to us girls, and then I saw his hand swinging a gun, and it
hit a man on the head--then another!”

Mary Jane’s eyes were as big as saucers as she describes it.

“Then somebody fired a shot and I saw the blood trickle down his cheek
where something had hurt him and he stopped hitting and began shooting.
The booth was filled with smoke in a moment and the shots ceased. I
heard him say----

“‘Ma’am, I reckon we better get out of here before the police and the
undertaker comes.’

“I don’t know how we ever got out of there. I had to step over men who
were lying on the floor and then I found myself in the open air, and
Gladys was crying, and the man got a hack and took us home. I tried to
thank him, but he just grinned, and then I--I grabbed him and kissed
him! Honest I did. And as I ran into the house I heard him say----

“‘Well, I’ll be hornswoggled!’

“I have never seen him since then. I know I did not thank him enough,
but if I ever see him again----”

“Yuh done quite a lot for him,” says Hashknife. “More than the lawyer
done for me. Still, I reckon, he didn’t feel like kissin’ me. Did the
police make any fuss over it?”

“We looked in the papers the next day, and it told about a fight in
which three gangsters were killed and two more wounded. They were all
wanted by the police, but it said nothing about the cowboy. If I ever
see him again I want to thank him again.”

“Sure,” says Windy; “we all do. He sure done us a favor, too, ma’am.”

“I wish you would call me Mary Jane.”

“All right,” grins Hashknife, “but you’ve sure got to cut out misterin’
us, Mary Jane. We’re sort of ele-mental, as the poet would say. Hash,
wind and sleep. Ain’t that elements? Haw! Haw! Haw!”

“Well,” says Mary Jane, grinning, “yuh might give me that gun-oil, so’s
I can limber up this old six-gun.”

“Wel-l-l-come to our cow-camp!” explodes Windy. “That sounded just like
old Mike, y’betcha. Mary Jane, if yuh wants anything out of the ordinary
in cuss words I can loan yuh some that the old man used to patronize.”

“They’ll come to her,” grins Hashknife. “Wait till she gets mad.”

A little later here comes a tall gray-haired feller in a buckboard. He
drives up to the bunk-house and speaks to Windy.

“Howdy, judge,” says Windy. “Meet Mister Hartley and Mister Stevens.
Gents, this is Judge Waugh.”

We shakes hands all around and then the judge says:

“Windy, I came up here to have a talk with you. I suppose you heard
about Pete Kelso getting shot.”

“When did this happen?” asks Windy.

“About noon or a little later--over by Cactus Cañon. Jimmy and Al Orr
found him. Shot with a .45-70. Likely live, I guess.”

“----!” exploded Windy. “Why, we came that way--huh!”

“Jimmy and Al said they thought it was you. They said there was four in
the bunch.”

“Cactus Cañon is on the Circle Dot Range, too,” says Windy,
serious-like, and the judge nods.

“Yes.”

“We don’t know who done it, judge,” says Hashknife. “It’s a cinch that
we didn’t. Somebody ripped my saddle all to pieces the other day, when I
rides on to Bar 20 land.”

“Tell me about it.”

Hashknife gives him the details.

“I don’t know,” says the judge. “Of course there has been bad blood
between these outfits for years. Each accuses the other of rustling, but
neither has any evidence. This shooting is getting serious. Lost any
stock lately, Windy?”

“I dunno. I do know that I seen seven cows with young calves down by the
old salt springs, and the next day I finds seven bawlin’ cows and nary a
calf. It ain’t reasonable to reckon that them cows all deserted their
offsprings.”

“The Bar 20 is boiling,” states the judge. “Snag Thorn is keeping cool,
but he’s cool just like his father used to be. The sheriff wanted to
arrest all of you, but Snag told him to keep out of it and let him
attend to you. They had quite a quarrel. I met Bowers as I came out, and
he told me he lost some more cows and a couple of young horses. I guess
Bowers is just about cleaned out.”

“Well,” says Hashknife, “we ain’t honin’ for trouble, but if they comes
out here I reckon we’ll do like they do in Spain when it rains.”

“How’s that?” asks the judge.

“Let it rain.”

“_Um-yah_” says the judge, grinning. “Well, I hope it won’t be a
cloudburst, boys. I’ve always kinda figured that some day something is
going to bust in the Sundown country. Bar 20 says that Circle Dot are
rustlers, and----”

“We says that they are,” finishes Windy. “She’s a de-plorable fact,
judge.”

“Bowers loses cows, too,” grins Hashknife. “Everybody loses some. I
reckon there’s goin’ to be work for the legal lights before long.”

“_Hm-m-m_,” says the judge; “I hope so, Hartley, but it kinda looks like
there wouldn’t be nothin’ but cripples to go to court.”

After the judge has gone Hashknife goes out and sets on the top pole of
the corral where he acts like he’s thinking. I throwed a rock at him but
he just ducked, stuck in that position and kept on thinking.

“Let him alone,” advises Windy. “That whippoorwill has somethin’ on his
mind. I jist worked long enough with him to respect him with a gun or
brains.”

“He sure can shoot,” I admits, but Hashknife never looked at us.

Me and Windy went down to the bunk-house and argued over the rules of
two-handed poker for about an hour, when the door opens and there stands
Sing Lee, with his hands wrapped up in his apron.

“Missie gone fo’ lide,” says he, offhanded-like.

“Ride?” says Windy, foolish-like, and Sing nods.

“Yessum. Yo’ _sabe_ glay hoss, Tinker name?”

“Uh-huh.”

“She lide glay hoss day she come. Yo’ _sabe?_ I t’ink she lide allesame
glay hoss today. Blimeby I see glay hoss Tinker name. She no like, yo’
_sabe?_ She allesame like glay hoss like Tinker. Me seeum.”

Windy sets there, staring at Sing, and then he gets slow-like to his
feet.

“Wait a minute, Sing. She rode a gray horse, but didn’t ride Tinker?”

“Yessum. Tinker down by collal. She rideum glay hoss. Yo’ _sabe_?”

Windy beats it for the door and I went behind him. Down by the corral
stands the gray horse she rode the day she came here. We went into the
stable, but the saddle ain’t on the peg.

“What’s all the fuss about?” I asks.

“My ----!” wails Windy. “She hooked a hull on to Cheater!”

“Meaning what?”

“Cheater!” wails Windy. “That sun-fishin’ man-eater from Wyoming. Looks
like Tinker. Oh, ---- it! Sleepy, that hawse is plumb loco! He might go
good for a mile and then dump her off and walk on her. He’s a ----
tiger!”

“Glay hoss,” says Sing, stony-faced, coming up to us; “look like Tinker,
yo’ _sabe_? Me t’ink ---- bad hoss, when me see Tinker. Mebbyso she get
dump. Me no see her go. Where Lashknife? Mebbyso he go too.”

“I suppose that ---- fool rode a gentle bronc,” wails Windy. “Where did
she go-o-o-o?”

“You must ’a’ herded sheep,” says I. “I knowed a shepherd who used to
say, _‘Ya-a-a-a-a-s_ and _no-o-o-o-o_,’ just like you do.”

“Funny, ain’tcha?” he howls. “Lady in peril, and you gets comical.”

“What do yuh want me to do--turn a handspring or climb a tree? We don’t
know where she went, do we?”

“My ----, you can ask useless questions, Sleepy! Don’t know where she
went, do we? I ask yuh to answer it yourself. You makes me tired, I tell
yuh. Just stand around and ask fool questions, when a-a----”

“Lady is in peril. Now, just what had we ought to do. Windy? Can yuh
track that pet man-eater? Got any idea what direction said horse favors
to go? If you----”

“Look!” yelps Windy. “----’s bells, look what’s comin’!”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Up the road comes a cloud of dust and in and out of that cloud goes a
dust-colored horse, bucking like a crazy animal. Sunfish, worm fence,
swapping ends and spinning like a top. Straight for the gate it comes,
bucking straight for us. We climbs the corral fence just as the animal
pitches straight into it, and goes down in a splinter of cottonwood
poles and a cloud of dust.

I fell off the fence and got up just in time to see Hashknife untangle
himself and step away from the horse. He looks down at it, trying to get
up, and then at Windy.

“That’s a ---- vigorous animal, Windy,” says he foolish-like, and then
he takes a deep breath and says----

“Get your Winchester and saddle--quick!”

“Why--uh--why--” grunts Windy.

“----!” he explodes. “Get into action, will yuh! I’ll tell yuh later.”

Well, it didn’t take us long to saddle up, get our rifles and breeze off
down the road, Hashknife in the lead.

“Mary Jane,” he grunts, as we swing in close to him. “She saddled that
gray bronc. Wanted to ride, asked me to go with her. I didn’t like the
looks of that gray, so I traded with her. We went halfway to town. I saw
that the gray wasn’t bridlewise, but he didn’t act bad until we met the
sheriff, and then he got restless. _Sabe?_”

“Me and the sheriff had words. That gray started to pitchin’, and I
busted a rein and couldn’t pull his head, and--and the jug-head bucked
all the way back home. First runnin’ bucker I ever seen. My ----, but
that bronc can hop, skip and jump somethin’ awful.”

“Mary Jane?” asks Windy. “Where is she?”

“They took her with ’em,” says Hashknife, kinda whispering. “The sheriff
and Bowers and a couple of them Bar 20 _hombres_.”

“Took her!” explodes Windy. “What for, Hashknife?”

“Said she owned the Circle Dot and they wanted her. Seems that that last
feller that was shot died. I called the sheriff and he drawed, but I
shaded him a little.

“What in ---- do yuh keep a bronc like that around for?”

“I thought it was the same gray that Mary Jane rode, honest I did. I
never looked at it close but I seen it kinda hump under the saddle, and
I thinks maybe it feels cocky and I was goin’ to shake it up a little
but I was the one that got shook. Couple of bullets fanned past me, but
they’d ’a’ had to have a shotgun to hit me on the wing thataway.”

“What are we goin’ to do?” I asks.

“Do? Sleepy, we’re goin’ to get our hoss back or they’ll have to build a
new town. I’m goin’ through that town like quicksilver through a sieve.”

“And land in the penitentiary,” says I. “Cool off a little, Hashknife,
and do a little thinking. There’s only three of us, yuh understand.”

“They’ll be lookin’ for us,” opines Windy, and then he asks--

“Was Snag Thorn with ’em?”

“Nope. One feller had a broken nose and a cock-eye, and the other had
bat-ears and a yellow mustache.”

“‘Blondy’ McClure and ‘Peeler’ Malloy,” says Windy. “As fine a pair of
horse-thieves as ever wore guns. Them two sure do show lack of Sunday
schoolin’, and I reckon this is the time that we teaches ’em a few
morals. Lemme get my old 40-82 lined up on either one--just lemme,
tha’sall.”

“You too,” says I, complaining-like. “Want to kill somebody? You two
_hombres_ hankers for gore regardless, don’t yuh? Regular killers, eh?
It’s a danged good thing you has a cool brain among yuh.”

“Cool ----!” snorts Hashknife. “Froze since the Winter of the big wind.”

“Course, this stealin’ of our lady boss don’t mean nothin’ to you,” says
Windy, sarcastic-like, easing himself in the saddle when his bronc kinda
loosens up. “You better go back and chop wood.”

“We won’t need any heat,” says I and everybody shuts up. We swung into
town and rode straight to a crowd in front of the saloon. On the
sidewalk lays a feller who looks a heap like he had met the enemy. We
jerks up in front of ’em and looks the bunch over. Hashknife and Windy
cocked their rifles and I’m expectin’ things to start whooping. This
bat-eared, yellow-mustached _hombre_ steps out of the crowd, and Windy
spurs in close to him and says:

“Talk out loud, Blondy. Where’s the lady?”

“Aw-w-w-w_, I dunno!” wails Blondy.

“She went, ---- it!”

“Anybody around here got any intelligence?” asks Hashknife, looking
around, and then he sees the bartender.

“What happened?” asks Hashknife.

“I didn’t see it all,” says the bartender. “I heard somebody yell that
here comes the sheriff and some feller with a lady, and I just got to
the door when I hears a gun pop, and I seen Peeler’s horse buckin’
across the street, draggin’ Peeler. Then I sees Snag Thorn running for
his horse and I seen a female on a horse runnin’ down the street. The
sheriff took a shot at somebody--I think it was Snag, but he didn’t hit
him.”

“The lady shot Peeler,” says a skinny puncher.

“She did not!” declares a little bow-legged puncher. “That first shot
hit the casing of the store door right beside me. Snag Thorn killed
Peeler.”

“Just the same, she shot at somebody.”

“Mebbe it was me then,” grins bow-legs.

“Where’d the sheriff go?” asks Windy.

“To his office, I reckon,” says the bartender. “Him and Bowers was
together.”

“Do yuh reckon Mary Jane went home?” asks Windy.

“She didn’t pass us,” says I.

“The female took a shot at Peeler,” insists the skinny puncher. “I seen
it. Peeler yanked his gun to--well, just then Snag shot from over there
on the sidewalk, and I seen Peeler fall off. I dunno which shot hit
him.”

“I tell yuh that first shot hit.”

We whirled and rode for the sheriff’s office and didn’t wait to hear the
finish of the argument. Their two horses are outside the door. We hops
right off and went inside. The sheriff and Bowers are in there. Bowers
is setting on the table, working some shells into a Winchester, while
the sheriff is washing his wrist where Hashknife’s bullet creased it.
Bowers drops the rifle and puts his hands up, but the sheriff keeps
right on bathing his wrist. He just looks at us and then back to his
wash-basin. Hashknife says:

“Sheriff, for a dobie cent I’d fill you full of lead. Where is Miss
Haley?”

“I dunno. Mebbe she’s at the Bar 20 by this time. I reckon Snag Thorn
will know what to do with her when he catches her.”

“What in ---- does he want her for?” asks Hashknife.

“Snag’s lost two men and a lot of cows and maybe he’s seein’ a chance to
get even.”

_Bang!_

The wash-basin hops right out from under the sheriff’s hands and a
splash of soapy water hits him right in the face.

“Say it this way-- ‘He thinks he’s lost cows,’” advises Hashknife,
rubbing his thumb softly over the hammer of his cocked Winchester.

“Th-thinks he’s lost cows,” mumbles the sheriff, shaking the soap out of
his eyes.

“I lost fifteen head and--” began Bowers, but Windy jabs him in the ribs
with his rifle-barrel.

“Who in ---- cares what you lost? You’re lucky to be alive.”

“Did Snag Thorn follow Miss Haley out of town?” I asks.

“Yeah! She shot one of his men, didn’t she? Maybe he rode to the ranch
to get the rest of his men. Said he was going to clean out the Circle
Dot while he had men enough left to help him.”

“Said that, did he?” asks Windy.

“He did. Whatcha mean by comin’ down here and actin’ like this? I’m the
sheriff of this county and I won’t stand----”

“I sure apologizes to the wash-basin,” says Hashknife, “but that’s as
far as I’ll go, Allen. You didn’t have no right to bring her here.”

“Didn’t I? Two men killed on her ranch, and cows stolen and----”

“Whope!” snaps Hashknife. “You never seen any of them on the Circle Dot.
You don’t know that they’ve lost cows.”

“Snag said----”

“Sure. Stick to what you heard, sheriff--not to what you think you
know.”

“She shot Peeler Malloy,” states Bowers.

“You’re a liar!” snaps Windy.

“Well,” sniffles Bowers. “Maybe I am mistaken, but I thought Blondy
said----”

“There’s too danged much talk about what somebody else said,” says
Hashknife. “Come on, boys; let’s get travelin’.”

“Where yuh goin’?” asks the sheriff.

“Goin’ to find out who has been doin’ all this dirty work. _Sabe?_”

“Zasso? Lemme tell yuh I’m the sheriff around here and I----”

The sheriff took hold of Hashknife’s left arm, like he was goin’ to stop
him, and I said a short prayer for Mister Allen. Hashknife had that
Winchester in his left hand, and it looked like the sheriff was goin’ to
try to take hold of it, but Hashknife’s right fist hooked him under the
chin and he lit on the back of his neck in the corner of his office and
stayed there.

“He-he’s goin’ to be sore as ----,” states Bowers, awed-like.

“Little liniment will fix him,” says Hashknife. “Come on, boys.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

We went out of that town like bats out of ---- and we never broke a
running lope until we hit the ranch. Mary Jane ain’t there. Sing Lee
says he ain’t seen her.

“What will we do now?” asks Windy, but Hashknife whirls his bronc around
and we follers him. We sailed out of the gate and hit straight for the
hills.

“You aimin’ to hit the Bar 20?” yells Windy.

“Just like a ton of lead,” says Hashknife. We tore across the dead-line,
and never slowed up until the Bar 20 ranch-house is in sight.

“Don’t shoot until yuh has to,” advises Hashknife.

We ripped right into their front yards, and set up our horses. Just then
Snag Thorn limps out of the front door and looks us over. I’ll say this
much for him; he didn’t act a danged bit nervous.

“Where’s our boss?” asks Hashknife.

“Your boss?” he says, foolish-like.

“The lady you followed out of town.”

“Oh!”

He looks us over for a moment and then says, kinda soft-like--

“That lady your boss?”

“Uh-huh. Where is she?”

“I don’t know. My horse fell with me and strained its shoulder. When I
got up she was gone.”

“You tellin’ the truth?” asks Hashknife.

Snag Thorn’s eyes got real narrow and he studies Hashknife. Then he
says-- “You don’t know me very well, do yuh?”

“He ain’t no liar,” says Windy; “Snag Thorn ain’t.”

“Much obliged, Woods,” says Snag Thorn.

“Excuse me,” says Hashknife. “That was a danged fool thing to say,
Thorn. Yuh see I was kinda excited. The sheriff arrested her and then
things happened in town and we didn’t find her at the ranch.”

“Yeah, I know,” says Snag, kinda weary-like. “I didn’t know she was your
boss, and I didn’t know she had a gun, but I saw Peeler reach for his
gun, so I cut down on him. The sheriff started after her but I cut him
back to the main herd, and then I seen that her horse was running away
with her. Peeler must ’a’ had hold of the bridle-reins and when her
horse yanked back the head-stall busted.”

“My ----!” gasps Windy. “She’s ridin’ without a bridle? Which way did
she go?”

“North,” says Snag. “The last I seen of her she was goin’ toward Devil’s
Dooryard, and then my bronc turned a somersault. When I got straightened
out she had disappeared.”

“It’ll be dark before we can get there,” says Hashknife. “That bronc she
is ridin’ will go hawg-wild without a bridle, ---- him! Mebbe he won’t
buck, but he--aw, shucks!”

Just then Blondy, Bowers and the sheriff comes in sight. They rides
slow-like up to us, looking like they was expectin’ trouble. Snag Thorn
leans against the doorway and looks at them. Then he says to the
sheriff--

“Come to get me for shootin’ Peeler?” The sheriff looks us all over and
then back at Snag.

“Didn’t know you shot him, Snag; thought it was the female.”

“I shot him,” states Snag coolly. “I’ll ask yuh--what did yuh arrest the
lady for, sheriff?”

Hack Allen wets his lips, rubs his sore jaw and rests his hands on his
saddle-horn.

“She’s the boss of the Circle Dot, ain’t she? Two of your men have been
shot on the Circle Dot Range, ain’t they? They been stealin’ your----”

“Period!” snaps Hashknife. “You’re goin’ to hold your breath too long
some of these days, Allen, and you’ll never get it again.”

“I’ll ask yuh for help when I need yuh, Allen,” says Snag.

“Yeah? Your dead-line didn’t seem to stop the Circle Dot.”

“Hack,” says Snag, “you better go back to your office and let my
business alone. Yuh might lock your door, too--if yuh want to play
safe.”

“I’ll run my office, _sabe?_ Neither you nor this bunch of gun-packers
from the Circle Dot can tell me where to head in at. You try takin’ the
law into your own hands and see how quick yuh get tripped up.”

Snag shrugs his shoulders and turns to Hashknife.

“What do yuh aim to do, Hartley?”

“Clean up this rotten range,” says Hashknife.

“Would yuh mind tellin’ me what this Baldy person was doin’ in the
Devil’s Dooryard the day he got shot?”

“Lookin’ for Bar 20 stock.”

“---- of a place to look for stock!” says Bowers.

“A cow don’t make tracks in there,” says Hashknife, thoughtful-like.

“Feller’d have to see the cow, I reckon.”

“What do yuh mean?” asks Snag.

“Baldy raved about seein’ cows in that place, but he was out of his
head.”

“The Circle Dot has lost a lot of cows, and there ain’t no ---- speakin’
of dead-lines, Thorn; you’ve got yours pretty well organized. I started
over here the other day, and as I crossed the Cow Crick I got two
bullets in my saddle. Yuh sure do protect your rights.”

“Did, eh?” Snag looks off across the hills, like he was thinking real
fast.

“I’ve lost a lot of cows,” complains Bowers. “Jist vanished.”

“This range needs cleanin’ up,” opines Hashknife, “and it’s time to get
busy. I ain’t accusin’ the Bar 20, Thorn. I think that Baldy was lookin’
for somethin’ in the right place. The Bar 20 is welcome to ride the
Circle Dot from now on. _Sabe?_ If the answer is on the Circle Dot
Range--find it.”

“Where yuh goin’ now?” asked the sheriff.

“Goin’ to find the lady first,” says Hashknife, “and after that I’m
goin’ to give you a few prisoners to feed, or a job for the coroner.”

“I’ll run my office!” snaps the sheriff, but Hashknife looks weary-like
at him and then turns away.

                 *       *       *       *       *

We went out of there and headed for the home ranch. Bowers rides with us
as far as his place and then swings into his own gate. We didn’t do any
talkin’ and he, for once in his life, didn’t harp about losing cows.
It’s dark when we reach the ranch, but Mary Jane hasn’t showed up yet.
Sing gives us a bite to eat and then we changed horses and hit into the
hills toward Devil’s Dooryard. There’s a big moon coming over the hills.
Not one of them flat-looking moons, but one what is round, like a big
yaller ball hanging up there.

Sudden-like, Hashknife stops his horse and points toward the moon. Along
’a jagged ridge above us, sharp-cut against the moon, appears a figure
on a horse. It’s there for several seconds, and then passes on.

“Mary Jane!” gasps Windy.

“Not unless she’s twins,” grunts Hashknife, as another mounted figure
passes between us and the moon.

“The danged fools!” grunts Hashknife.

“Well who do yuh reckon it is?” asks Windy, but Hashknife don’t reply.
He swings his horse and we rides up the hill, angling to try and cut the
trail of the two horsemen. It’s plumb dark and going is tough. We has to
angle all over that hill to get to the top, and when we get there we
ain’t no better off, as far as I can see.

Hashknife swings off his horse and ties it to a scrub-pine. Me and Windy
follers suit and then we all slips our Winchesters loose.

“Now that we’re all assembled, Hashknife, yuh might tell us whyfor and
which,” states Windy, peering off into that jumble of fantastic-looking
rocks.

“I dunno,” admits Hashknife. “I’ve just got a hunch.”

“He’s just got a hunch, Windy,” says I. “Hashknife’s like a lot of other
jaspers what ain’t got no brains--he has hunches. What does your pet
hunch say to yuh, Mister Hartley?”

“Hook on to your rifle and try to keep your big feet from rollin’
rocks,” grunts Hashknife, and we goes sneaking off across the Devil’s
Dooryard in the dark.

“I’d like to know where I’m goin’,” says I. “This here business of
packin’ a rifle and hobblin’ over----”

Just then I got my toe caught between two rocks and I sprawled flat on
my face. I throwed my rifle about ten feet away and the danged thing
went off. We can hear that old .45-70 echo from all points of the
compass. There ain’t a word said for a while, and then Windy says:

“Yuh hadn’t ought to have a gun, Sleepy. Honest to gosh, yuh hadn’t.
Next time we’ll give yuh a fish-pole.”

“No,” says Hashknife, sad-like; “no fish-pole, Windy. Give him a toy
balloon.”

“He’d likely pinch it and then she’d bust,” objects Windy.

“I couldn’t help it,” says I. “I fell. The gun must ’a’ struck on the
hammer. I can’t get my toe loose.”

“Can’t get loose?” grunts Hashknife. “Stuck fast, Sleepy?”

“Tighter ’n a wedge.”

“Fine! Come on, Windy. We’ll leave him where he’ll stay put.”

Know what them two wallopers done? Well, they went away and left me,
that’s what they done. After twisting my toe half-off, I discovers that
I can lift my foot out of my boot without no trouble, the same of which
gives me both hands to unfasten that trapped boot. Then I got my rifle
and blunders ahead in the dark about ten minutes behind Hashknife and
Windy. I don’t know where they went. I know I must ’a’ been Injuning
along pretty skookum, ’cause I almost stumbled over a cougar. Mister
Cougar gives one despairing yelp, and fades away among the rocks, while
old man Stevens’ son climbed up on a pinnacle of rocks and perspired
freely.

Just in below me is a deep cañon, winding around among the rocks. Every
danged thing looks kinda blue and silver-like. The moon ain’t climbed up
high enough to light up things much, and I lays there in the edge of
that pinnacle, trying to assemble enough tobacco to make a cigaret.

All to once I hears the squeak of saddle-leather and I spills the
tobacco. I listens some more and hears it again. Then I lays down and
peers into the cañon and I sees something. Ghosts! Honest to grandma, I
got a bird’s-eye view of two riders, passing along without a sound, and
all to once they fades out. They can’t be more than fifty feet below me,
and their horses don’t make a sound on that rocky floor.

“Sleepy,” says I. “You’ve plumb seen a ghost!” And then I says to
myself, “You’re a liar, ’cause ghost-saddles don’t squeak.”

Then I stand up and looks around, and across from me, against the
sky-line I sees a man. There’s only one way to find out whether he’s
friend or foe, and that is to kill him.

I lifts my rifle against the light of the sky and tries to notch my
sights. Then I took my rifle down, lays her on a rock and goes on
without it. I reckon it must ’a’ hit a rock when I fell, ’cause the
front sight has been knocked plumb off, and I ain’t like some fellers
that can shoot a rifle by the sense of smell. I sneaks along, using
every sense I’ve got, and all to once something tells me to stop.

I stands there for about two minutes, still as possible, and then I
hears Windy’s voice whisper:

“I dunno, ---- it! If it moves again I’ll take a chance.”

“It ain’t goin’ to,” says I.

“Got loose, did yuh?” asks Hashknife.

“No,” says I; “I dragged the whole ---- mountain over with me. Did yuh
see the ghosts? I knocked the sight off my rifle.”

“What ghosts?” asks Windy, and then I told ’em about the two riders I
seen in the cañon.

“Think he’s lying, Hashknife?” asks Windy.

“No-o-o-o. Ridin’ barefooted horses, with gunny-sacks mufflin’ their
hoofs. Went up the cañon, Sleepy?”

“I think so. I shook hands with a cougar about a minute before and maybe
my compass was out of order.”

“But where in ---- is Mary Jane?” says Windy, complaining-like. “All
this time we ain’t findin’ her a-tall.”

“Yuh might do like they do in hotels,” says Hashknife; “start off up the
Devil’s Dooryard, yellin’ ‘Mary Jane! Mary Jane Haley! Windy Woods wants
Mary Jane Haley!’”

“_Sh-h-h-h!_” hisses Windy.

We listens. Pretty soon we hear somebody walkin’ soft-like. Then
silence.

“My ----!” whispers Windy. “What do yuh reckon that was--ghosts?”

From ’way up the hill comes the rattle of a couple of shots. They must
be a quarter of a mile away. Then we hears somebody grunt; comes the
rattle of gravel, and then we hears somebody running.

“Come on,” says Hashknife, “but for ---- sake, go easy. There’s too
danged much shooting going on to suit me. Look out--here comes a horse!”

Over the top of a saw-tooth ridge jerks a horse. For a second or two
it’s outlined against the light of the sky and then it goes rattling off
across the rocks.

“That’s my horse!” exploded Hashknife. “Mary Jane is a-foot! Come on!”

_Bang! Bang! Bang!_

Three distinct shots split the night and rattle among the rocks.

“Six-shooter,” gasps Hashknife, stumbling. “I wish the devil would clean
up his yard!”

We staggers along, cutting our feet on the sharp rocks and praying that
it will be light enough to shoot when we meet somebody to shoot at. All
to once we hits the edge of that deep cañon. There ain’t no warning. I
feels my feet slip into some loose stuff, so I grabs hold of Windy.

I hears Hashknife speak an unlovely word, and then me and Windy starts
doing a toboggan to the bottom. It wasn’t straight down, but I’d just as
soon fall as to set down in that loose stuff and get all heated up doing
a slide for life.

                 *       *       *       *       *

We landed in the bottom with about a ton of loose stuff, composed mostly
of glassy gravel and other sharp-pointed particles. I got the dust out
of my mouth, and I orates openly that we’ve lost Hashknife.

That operation caused a bullet to _flup_ into our private landslide.

“Mebbe you’ll keep your mouth shut,” says Hashknife’s voice.

“How’d yuh get there?” I asks.

“Sittin’ down, yuh ---- fool!”

“Oh,” says Windy, taking a few deep breaths, “I’m all worn off from my
belt to my knees. Who is shootin’ at us, I’d love to ask?”

Then we seen the flash of the next shot and the bullet threw dust into
my face. I reckon our six-shooters cracked at the same time and then we
fell all over each other trying to change positions. I bumped into
Hashknife and we both fell over Windy.

“Don’t get excited,” begs Hashknife.

“That ---- fool up there couldn’t hit us with a shotgun--unless it was a
mistake.”

“Mistakes has killed a lot of good men,” wails Windy. “I don’t want to
be no accidental corpse. Let’s go and find Mary Jane Haley. We’re
wastin’ a lot of good time, don’t yuh know it? Come on.”

“Well, who is shooting at us?” I asks. “Hashknife Hartley, if yuh know,
tell us, will yuh?”

“Merely a surmise, Sleepy, but I think I’m right. Felt all along that I
had the answer, but I wasn’t sure until tonight.”

“Fine!” grunts Windy. “Go ahead and tell us.”

“Let’s get under cover and wait for daylight.”

“While our li’l boss wanders around this God-forsaken place in the
dark?” asks Windy. “I’m goin’ out and find her.”

“All right,” says Hashknife, “go ahead. I’ve got a hunch that
somebody’ll lead yuh up a heap if yuh climb any farther, but it’s your
business, Windy.”

“Who’d lead me up?”

“Tell yuh tomorrow--or, I reckon I’d better say, today. Must be gettin’
toward mornin’.”

A deer came along after while, and if Hashknife hadn’t grabbed my arm
I’d a took a shot at it. I thought it was a man with a white pack on his
back. It sure was sneaking along mysterious-like. My nerves had got to a
frazzled state. I ain’t brave. Nope--not when it’s so danged dark that I
can’t see which way to run.

After while it begins to get lighter and the old moon begins to lose a
lot of his yaller. Down the hill a cougar rises his voice in sorrow and
wo, and far away we hears the nicker of a horse.

“I can see to notch my sights,” announces Hashknife, after while, “and I
reckon I can recognize a friend as far as I can hit anything. Let’s go.”

“Who do we shoot at?” I asks. “Any preference, Hashknife?”

“I reckon they’ll show their hand, Sleepy. Keep your danged head down.”

“Whose danged head is this? Yuh won’t tell anything, and yuh crabs when
a feller wants to see something for himself. What for kind of a way is
that to act? Are we with yuh, or just one of your party?”

“I wants to find Mary Jane first of all,” says Windy, sad-like. “I’m
gettin’ worried.”

“Yeah, and get wrinkled like a Siwash squaw,” grunts Hashknife. “Whoa,
Blaze!”

Hashknife points at a jumble of rocks farther up on the hill. We sees
the figure of a man, humped over, crawling along like a big lizard.
Comes the _whang_ of a gun, and the man collapses in the rocks. But he
ain’t dead. We sees him shoot twice, and then he drops lower and begins
crawling.

“Shall I wing him?” asks Windy.

“Nope,” grunts Hashknife. “Dunno who he is yet. Got a idea, but ain’t
sure.”

“This is a lot of fun for us, Sleepy,” says Windy. “The general won’t
let us privates shoot until he sees the whites of their eyes.”

We sneaked along behind boulders, working up higher all the time. I
ain’t got no knees left in my pants, the same of which makes ’em match
in front and rear. We rounds the corner of a pinnacle, and Hashknife
stops.

“I’m foreman of the Circle Dot,” says Windy, peevish-like, “and I do
admire to know why they comes up here and shoots up my nice li’l rocks.
Goin’ to put up signs today, warnin’ folks to keep off my grass,
y’betcha.”

I sticks my head over the top. _Zowie!_ A bullet _spings_ off the rock
beside my ear and goes buzzing off down among the cliffs.

“Next time I go out with you, Sleepy, I’m goin’ t’ pack a spade,” says
Hashknife. “You sure does invite interment.”

We hugs the rocks for a while, and then peers out again. _Splat!_ A
bullet flattens right beside my ear and I slides back.

Then I scratches my ear, looks at the lead spatter on the rock and
cusses some more.

“We-e-e-ell,” drawls Hashknife, grinning, “I reckon you’ll get sensible
now. That only misses by six inches. Huh!”

Hashknife rolls over, pokes into a rock crevice, and begins to climb.
It’s only about seven feet to the top of the rock, and me and Windy
stays there looking up at the soles of his boots. He stops. We sees him
kinda anchor his knee against the side of the rock and then his rifle
sings its little song. A empty shell rattles down at us and we hears him
chuckle. Then he slides down to us and huddles down.

“Ketchum bad-man,” he grunts, stuffing another shell into the magazine
of his rifle.

“Didja hit him?” asks Windy.

“If I didn’t, he must be a danged fool to upset the way he did.”

_Spo-o-o-w!_ A bullet burned across my shoulder and whizzed into the air
off the rock behind me. I dropped flat and remembered every cuss word I
ever heard.

“And I raised him, Windy,” says Hashknife when I runs out of breath.

“I’ve learned his meek and mildness, but the minute the ---- fool gets
mad he backslides. Didja ever hear such language? Awful! I hates to see
anybody kill him, ’cause his soul won’t be welcome nowheres.”

“He ain’t got none,” declares Windy. “No soul a-tall, Hashknife, but,
man, man, he sure has a memory for words.”

“Burnt me right across the shoulder,” says I. “Stay here and get killed
if you must, but I’m goin’ to smoke that _hombre_ out. _Sabe_?”

“We’ve got to find Mary Jane,” says Windy. “All this time----”

“We’ll find her,” says Hashknife. “I figure she ain’t far away.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

We crawls over the top of them rocks, out through the fissure and glides
down the other side. Then we crawls on our hands, knees and belly until
our shirts are on a par with our knees and seats. We reaches the other
side of the hill and angles through the rocks, until we’re working
around behind a sort of cliff. Then a danged rattlesnake has to plant
himself right in our trail. Ornery son of a gun wouldn’t budge and we
didn’t want to shoot him for fear of letting folks know where we were.

There wasn’t a loose rock in reach, so Hashknife takes off his belt,
slips his holster off and then he slams Mr. Snake with the buckle-end.
It sure was effective. Windy collects the rattles as we go past. We gets
almost around the cliff and then gets to our feet and peers around.

“Got to get up higher,” whispers Hashknife. “I reckon we can climb this
end of the cliff.”

We crawls to the top and finds that it’s still lower than the main part
of the cliff, but between us and the high part is about fifty feet of
open country. We thought it was cliff all the way, and here we are up on
kind of a table-rock. We peers around.

“Look!” croaks Windy.

There’s a man crawling along the base of the higher cliff. Windy lifts
his rifle and lines his sights, but Hashknife pushes the gun aside.

“That’s Snag Thorn!” grits Windy.

“Lemme nail him, Hashknife. Dirty rustler.”

“Betcha the whole gang are scattered around here,” says I.

“Wait a minute,” cautions Hashknife. “Plenty of time to kill him.”

“My ----! Look!” wails Windy. “There’s Mary Jane!”

We gets a glimpse of her on the side of that cliff, beyond the angle of
where Snag Thorn is crawling, and she’s coming down. We can see her
plain for a moment and then she goes down behind the angle of the rocks.

“Snag’s sneaking up on her!” gasps Windy. “The dirty pup!”

“----!” grunts Hashknife. “He likely don’t know she’s anywhere near
here. Watch up the hill. Keep looking up toward where Snag is going.”

The three of us searches every sign on the side of the hill and all to
once Windy says: “I see a man. See that V-shaped pinnacle, with the
point stickin’ out the side? Look right in below that. See him?
Look--he’s movin’ around!”

Hashknife’s rifle jerks to his shoulder and shoots twice.

“My ----!” yelps Windy. “You’ve hit him! Some shootin’!”

“Come on,” snaps Hashknife.

We went down off that rock like three squirrels and went ducking and
dodging straight for where we seen Snag, but there ain’t a bullet coming
our way. We’re halfway across to the rock when we hears a gun, but
Hashknife don’t stop.

The three of us went around the corner of that cliff, and there stands
Snag Thorn with his back to us, and he’s nursing his right hand. Against
the side of the cliff stands Mary Jane, her hair hanging down, her hat
gone and her dress is all torn and dirty. Her face is as white as chalk,
and I thought she might ’a’ got hit. Neither of them sees us, although
Snag ain’t twenty feet away.

Then Snag says:

“I thought it was you. I seen yuh in town--just a glimpse, but I
remembered yuh, and when your horse ran away with yuh----”

“Oh!” says Mary Jane, “I w-wish I hadn’t shot you--I--I----”

“I tried to find yuh in Frisco,” says Snag. “I lost the address and I--
But it don’t matter, I reckon.”

Snag looks down at his hand.

“Yuh see the Circle Dot says I’m a rustler and my dad and your uncle
killed each other, and--I’ll help yuh get home safe, Miss Haley--if your
men won’t fill me full of lead on my way out.”

“Have they been shooting at you?” she asks and he nods.

“Did you or your men shoot at me?”

“I came alone--and I didn’t shoot at you.”

“I thought it was your men,” says she. “I--I--that horse ran away with
me and brought me up here. I was afraid to get off but after a while it
stopped and I got off, and--and I didn’t have any bridle and I couldn’t
catch it again.

“It got dark and I climbed up on top of the cliff and in the night I saw
two men on horses ride past. I was afraid to call to them, but as I
followed them--or rather went the way they did and heard them talking--I
almost ran into them. There’s a cave up there, and they were talking
something about somebody getting suspicious and about cow-tracks, and
one of them said the best thing they could do was to either bluff it out
or fight it out.

“I heard my name mentioned and Mr. Hartley’s, and--and I thought it was
some of your men, and then one of them said: ‘Let’s bunch it. Nobody
will ever know where we went, and they’ll never find this place in a
thousand years.’”

“A cave?” asks Snag. “Up here?”

“Yes. It’s big enough to ride a horse into. One of the men said: ‘This
sure has been easy pickings for us, but I made a big mistake when I
missed that Hashknife person. He’s got too much _sabe_.’ And then the
other one said: ‘Yes, you went too strong, I guess, and didn’t shoot
straight enough.’

“I don’t know just what happened then, but I must have touched a loose
rock, because it fell and made a lot of noise. I ran behind the rock and
they went past me. Then I crept to the side of the hill, but they saw me
and shot at me. I just remembered that I still had a gun and I shot. I
don’t think I hit anybody and then I managed to get here and climb up on
that rock. I--I think they shot several times at me, but it all seemed
like nightmare, and then I--I shot at you.”

“So did they,” said Snag, foolish-like.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Mary Jane leans back against the rock and begins to weep. I starts to go
over to her but Hashknife yanks me back. Snag walks over to her and pats
her on the shoulder, kinda bashful-like, and says:

“Gosh, don’t do that! I’m all right and you found the place where they
drifted all those cows, and we’ll find the rustlers.”

“Bub-but I shot you,” wails Mary Jane. “I--I don’t know how I happened
to hit you. You saved my life that n-night in San Francisco, and I
wanted to th-thank you, but I shot----”

“Aw, that’s all right,” says Snag, foolish-like. “You can shoot me any
old time yuh feel like it.”

Wasn’t that a ---- of a thing for a growed-up man to say?

“Duck!” says Hashknife, and the three of us went down like prairie-dogs
when a hawk shows up.

“What was it?” whispers Windy, cocking his gun.

“Arrows,” says Hashknife, and then he takes me by the arm and leads me
away, with Windy sneaking along behind.

Hashknife takes us ’way down among the rocks and then stops.

“Arrows?” asks Windy. “Whatcha mean?”

Just then we sees Mary Jane and Snag come down around the side of the
cliff. They stops and looks off across the country, and then they starts
off down among the rocks, and Snag and Mary Jane are hanging on to each
other’s hand.

“Arrows?” asks Windy again.

“Cupid,” explains Hashknife. “Little feller, who don’t wear no pants.
Shoots a bow and arrow.”

“You’re loco,” grunts Windy, and then we follers Hashknife up to where
we saw the man spill into the rocks. Windy looks at Hashknife, but don’t
say a word, and then we went down and helped Hashknife find the other
one.

“My ----” says Windy. “Did yuh know who they was, Hashknife?”

“Sure. I had a good idea right off the reel, but I wasn’t sure until I
got shot at down on Cow Crick, after I told Bowers I was goin’ over to
the Bar 20. Did you ever hear of that cave?”

“Nope,” replies Windy. “I don’t reckon anybody ever cared to pesticate
around up there, ’cause I never heard there was any caves.”

“There had to be a way out,” states Hashknife. “I reckon that old crater
must run plumb through into Bluff Lake Valley, and they runs a few head
of steers through at a time. Likely run in a few at a time and held them
up in the rocks until they has enough to make a drive. I knowed the
answer was up here, ’cause Baldy got shot here, and somebody bawled him
out for bein’ on Circle Dot Range. They kept the two ranches fightin’
each other, while they stole from both.”

“I wonder,” says Windy, sad-like. “I wonder if Snag and Mary Jane----”

“Kinda looks thataway,” nods Hashknife. “And the sheriff’s office ain’t
got no keeper and Blubber won’t ever have to get his adenoids cut out,”
says I.

“Well,” says Windy, “I reckon it’s all right for Snag to get Mary Jane.
I like her fine, yuh understand. Yeah, I like her better than any girl I
ever seen, but she’s too danged good for me. I--I never said anythin’ to
her--never intended to, yuh understand? Why, if she was to ask me to
marry her I’d have to refuse. Yessir, I’d have to. What would you do in
a case like that, Hashknife?”

“Just like you would, you ---- liar,” says Hashknife, and we went down
through the Devil’s Dooryard without further comment.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL'S DOORYARD ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
